Error message tutorial (#3306)
ElektraInitiative/libelektra: doc/tutorials/understanding-error-messages.md

# Understanding Error Messages

Errors can happen when trying to mount with insufficient permissions, missing plugin configurations or when you want to write
specifications for your configurations and test it out or many other occasions. The error message gives information on what the problem is and possibly how
to resolve them.

Here is an example how you can trigger an error for an invalid IP entry in the `hosts` file:

```sh
sudo kdb mount --with-recommends /etc/hosts system/tests/hosts hosts
sudo kdb set system/tests/hosts/ipv4/my 88.198.134.1777
# RET: 5
# Sorry, module network issued the error C03200:
# Validation Semantic: name: system/tests/hosts/ipv4/my value: 88.198.134.1777 message: Name or service not known

#cleanup
sudo kdb umount system/tests/hosts
```

Note that you can always pass the **command line arguments -v (verbose) and -d (debug)** to the command line to get

> extra information. Especially if you want to locate the configuration file which caused the error.

Reviewer: So what would happen in the example above?

# Understanding Error Messages

Errors can happen when trying to mount with insufficient permissions, missing plugin configurations or when you want to write
specifications for your configurations and test it out or many other occasions. The error message gives information on what the problem is and possibly how
to resolve them.

Here is an example how you can trigger an error for an invalid IP entry in the `hosts` file:

```sh
sudo kdb mount --with-recommends /etc/hosts system/tests/hosts hosts
sudo kdb set system/tests/hosts/ipv4/my 88.198.134.1777
# RET: 5
# Sorry, module network issued the error C03200:
# Validation Semantic: name: system/tests/hosts/ipv4/my value: 88.198.134.1777 message: Name or service not known

#cleanup
sudo kdb umount system/tests/hosts
```

> In this example we mount the hosts file under `/etc/hosts` into Elektra. Elektra also validates

Reviewer: Simply make assumptions (in the beginning of the tutorial) what you expect readers to know. It does not make sense to explain mounting here. The important part (why set fails), however, is not yet explained here.

our input which is shown in the next line where we tried to set an invalid IP address. With this we can add or edit entries
by using the tools of Elektra and do not need to edit the file directly.

> Note that you can always pass the **command line arguments -v (verbose) and -d (debug)** to the command line to get

Reviewer: Imho it is not so important to make this bold. It is also a bit out of the blue that this is explained. You did not yet explain why `kdb set` above fails. Alternatively: explain why we would need `-v` or `-d` here.

extra information. Especially if you want to locate the configuration file which caused the error. Providing both parameter would

> yield an additional message which looks as following on my system:

Reviewer: Why is this dependent on your system? In which way?

> ```

Reviewer: Why is this now not in shell recorder? Make one example for this whole tutorial.

sudo kdb set -vd system/tests/hosts/ipv4/my 88.198.134.1777
# RET: 5
# Sorry, module network issued the error C03200:
# Validation Semantic: name: system/tests/hosts/ipv4/my value: 88.198.134.1777 message: Name or service not known
# Mountpoint: system/tests/hosts
# Configfile: /etc/hosts.13163:1575216150.11522.tmp
# At: <path>/src/plugins/network/network.c:184
```

You can see that every message comes with an error code which is `C03200` in the upper example which is a semantic validation error.

> Since v0.9 Elektra has hierarchically structured error codes that are leaned on to [SQL States](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SQLSTATE)

Reviewer: In a tutorial it is not so important how it was. Important is how it is now. (I know anyway what your changes were). Also imho the relation to "SQL Sates" is not really important. It is explained in the design decision anyway.

because it is easily extensible without introducing major breaking releases. Each character has a special meaning.

> Lets take the semantic validation error `C03200` as example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let us take the semantic validation error `C03200` as example:
```

> - `C` indicates `C`ode and should distinguish error codes from normal numbers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `C` indicates `C`ode and distinguishes error codes from other numbers in bug reports and alike
```

> - `03` indicates the major parent category (will be explained shortly). Two numbers were taken in case we want more than 10 major error categories in the future

Reviewer: Try to avoid forward references. Try to make one red line through everything which explains everything step by step.

- `2` indicates a subcategory. `1` for example would be syntactic validation errors which differs in the meaning
- `0` and `0` could be used to introduce even further subcategorizations which are under semantic validation errors

> Before Elektra v0.9 we had around 210 categories which were reduced to a total of 12. All macros as well as error codes can be seen in

Reviewer: Again: here it does not matter how it was. Such problems can be written in the design decisions. Maybe go over them again and update them now, so that all your documentation is consistent and nice to read.

[errors.c](/src/libs/elektra/errors.c) where they are generated via macro preprocessing.
You can see all error categories along with its meanings in our [categorization guideline](../dev/error-categorization.md).
The guideline is important for both developers who want to contribute to Elektra as well as users who struggle with solving certain errors.
Every category comes with its own special method of handling the errors. In the upper example we have a validation error which indicates
that we should retry with a different value which fulfills the semantics of an IP. If we set a correct IP address, Elektra will save it to
the `hosts` file:

> ```

Reviewer: Again this should be in shell recorder.

sudo kdb set system/tests/hosts/ipv4/my 88.198.134.177
Create a new key system/tests/hosts/ipv4/my with string "88.198.134.177"
```

We thought of three major error categories in which every error solution approach fits. The more concrete the category gets,
the more concrete you know which solution approach you will have to take. E.g., whereas the category `Permanent Errors` tells you
that the problem lies on your system, the subcategory `Resource Errors` tells you that there are no enough permissions for a certain action
or the resource does not exist. Elektra enforces developers to use the most specific category as possible to help users find the appropriate
solution. Some categories of Elektra are `parent categories` of more specific error categories. E.g., is the
semantic validation error a concrete subcategory of `Validation errors` (`C03XXX`) that indicate that a certain requirement is not fulfilled
by the provided value. As a result some error categories are not available for putting in errors. We want to give a rough introduction

> to the three major error categories but for more detail we encourage you to look into our [categorization guideline](../dev/error-categorization.md).

Reviewer: Stress more that this should be read and by whom.

1. Permanent Errors `C01XXX`

   The problem most likely lies on your system or Elektra has a bug. Investigate the concrete error message
   which indicates the source of failure (Permissions, Memory, Bug, etc.)

2. Conflict `C02XXX`

   It seems that you have changed the mounted file manually. Elektra needs to synchronize with the underlying file
   so try to synchronize your internal state and retry to get rid of this error. You can see the actual file
   by passing the `-v` parameter to the command line. These errors may also happen if you use one of our bindings
   and do not call `kdbGet` before `kdbSet` since Elektra needs to know the state before it can add/modifiy/delete
   existing keys.

3. Validation `C03XXX`

   Validation errors are heavily used for Elektra's `configuration specification`
   feature and should tell users that their given input does not match a certain
   pattern/type/expected semantic. Retry but with a conforming configuration value.

## Error message format

Error messages which are emitted from Elektra have the same message format for all errors

> (See [design decision](../decisions/error_message_format.md)).

Reviewer: Isn't the link too early. Give an overview and then say who should read this.

a concrete plugin. All plugins have to have a name and this is guaranteed by the compiler. Before Elektra v9.0 we also
had even more fields to display such as `ingroup` that indicated which group emitted the error (e.g., plugins). In the effort to keep the
message as succinct as possible we decided to [remove this field](/doc/decisions/ingroup_removal.md).

## Error handling for developers

If you want to contribute to Elektra or write your own specific plugin you can use the integrated error macros which
eases the error handling. In general the [plugins README](plugins.md) is a good way to start you journey through writing your own plugin.
All macros can be used by including `kdberrors.h` into the source file.
For more information about the macros please read through `elektra_set_concrete_type_error` section in the [plugins.md](plugins.md) tutorial.
Internally when Elektra emits an error it sets a [metadata](/doc/dev/metadata.md) to a Key which then is later on parsed into the error message.
The key name of the error key is the mountpoint of the configuration. If an error occurs, 7 metadata are set which can be seen in our

> [error-handling tutorial](../dev/error-handling.md). Later on those metadata are passed into a message template which renders the message

Reviewer: In the folder "dev" there are no tutorials but technical documents. Please distinguish these documents and clearly separate this. 
https://www.divio.com/blog/documentation/

as seen above. The same goes for warnings except that there can be up to 100 warnings but only a single error.

One of the major painpoints we had during refactoring of all error messages came from inconsistent messages. We encourage
developers to read through our [error-message guidelines](/doc/dev/error-message.md). For out of memory errors we even enforced
a consistent error message by altering the macro which is used for emitting errors. It does not contain a text field anymore because
these messages should be identical in all cases. Each error message category comes with associated information which should be present.

> Validation errors for example should require the key and value in every message but is not "templated" yet. If you cannot find good possibility

Reviewer: I think this text does not help the reader of the tutorial. Ideally you would finish #3263. Alternatively, why not simply providing two templates. Then at least these parts you already did in #3263 and what new people will add can use the common layout for validation errors. Furthermore, I also think that syntax/semantic validation distinction is pretty much still unanswered in doc/dev/error-categorization.md

to add this information meaningful into the message you will most likely want to put an error into the wrong category or there is a need
for a new category (e.g., if multiple keys are affected one might introduce a "structural validation" which accepts these). In the latter

> case please forge a [design decision](/doc/decisions/README.md) and open a pull request for discussion.

Reviewer: The tutorial should guide and give answers, not to open up new questions.

### Catching errors in language bindings

> Elektra provides many useful language bindings which allows you to code for Elektra in your favorite programming language.

Reviewer: The text comes out of the blue. Continue explaining the hosts errors. How would I implement what I see above in Java?

Since errors are built up hierarchically you can catch either general errors (e.g., all Permanent Errors) or a very specific one (e.g., Resource Error)
and react appropriate. For Java for example you can catch errors in the following form:

```java
		try (final KDB kdb = KDB.open (parentKey))
		{
			final KeySet ks = KeySet.create (10, KeySet.KS_END);

>             kdb.get (ks, parentKey);

Reviewer: formatting wrong

# Understanding Error Messages

> If you want to use Elektra for any of your projects you will sooner or later run into errors. These can happen

Reviewer 2: > If you want to use Elektra for any of your projects you will sooner or later run into errors.

I did not know we make this guarantee.

Author: It happens quite easily for me ;) Should I change it to "you may sooner or late" ?

Reviewer: Yes, the sentence is a bit weird. Simply start with the second sentence that there are many different situations where errors might occur.

Reviewer 2: Is the sentence at all relevant to understanding of error messages?

A better start for the tutorial might be.. "Errors can happen when trying to mount with insufficient permissions, [...]. The error message gives information on what the problem is." (and possibly how to resolve the problem?)

Regarding the initial sentence it might be better to open issues and give insight on how we can improve the situation. To me such a message does not seem to help the user.

quite easily such as trying to mount with insufficient permissions, missing plugin configurations or when you want to write
specifications for your configurations and test it out.

Here is an example how you can trigger an error for an invalid IP entry in the `hosts` file:

```sh

> sudo kdb mount --with-recommends /etc/hosts system/hosts hosts

Reviewer: Please mount to system/tests/hosts.

sudo kdb set system/hosts/ipv4/my 88.198.134.1777
# RET: 5
# Sorry, module network issued the error C03200:
# Validation Semantic: name: system/hosts/ipv4/my value: 88.198.134.1777 message: Name or service not known

#cleanup
sudo kdb umount system/hosts

> ```

Reviewer: Now continue explaining all parts that are involved to make this error like it is and link to all deepening documents about errors (in dev and decisions).

Author: I am still unsure what you else want. The `categorization guideline` actually contains all necessary information about the errors. I can also link to the error message format but what else do you think of?

Reviewer: How to emit errors (e.g. in plugins), how to handle errors in tools, how to generate error message (-d, -v), ...

Note that you can always pass the **command line arguments -v (verbose) and -d (debug)** to the command line to get
extra information. Especially if you want to locate the configuration file which caused the error.

You can see that every message comes with an error code which is `C03200` in the upper example which is a semantic validation error.
Since v0.9 Elektra has hierarchically structured error codes that are leaned on to [SQL States](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SQLSTATE).
Some categories of Elektra are `parent categories` of more specific error categories. E.g., is the
semantic validation error a concrete subcategory of `Validation errors` (`C03XXX`) that indicate that a certain requirement is not fulfilled
by the provided value.
You can see all error categories along with its meanings in our [categorization guideline](../dev/error-categorization.md).

> Every category comes with its own solution approach which is intended to be as generic as possible.

Reviewer: What is a solution approach?

sudo kdb umount system/tests/hosts
```

> In this example we mount the hosts file under `/etc/hosts` into Elektra. The `hosts` plugin will also validate

Reviewer: It is not the hosts plugin itself, please look how it works (glob plugin marks with metadata, and ipaddr actually validates). This is very different to the specification model. For specifications, see doc/tutorials/validation.md

This tutorial could also cover how to specify check/validation/message.

Author: I rewrote the sentence

   Validation errors are heavily used for Elektra's `configuration specification`
   feature and should tell users that their given input does not match a certain
   pattern/type/expected semantic. Retry but with a conforming configuration value.

## Error message format

> Error messages which are emitted from Elektra's C/C++ code have the same message format for all errors

Reviewer: Why should this be specific for C/C++?

Author: How do you say "everything non-tool related"? What I have seen is that only tools may yield other error messages

Reviewer: Tools yielding other error messages are simply a bug that have not yet been fixed.

(See [design decision](../decisions/error_message_format.md)).

> The design looks like this with an example reason given:

Reviewer: If it is already "like", you do not need to give "example" anymore.

```
Sorry, module `MODULE` issued [error|warning] `NR`:
`ERROR_CODE_DESCRIPTION`: Validation of key "<key>" with string "<value>" failed.
```

> If you need more information you can pass the debug argument `-d` to the command which also shows at which line in the source code

Reviewer: Wouldn't it make sense to first describe -v?

the error was emitted:

```
At: <path>/src/plugins/network/network.c:184
```

If you want additional information about the mountpoint or the configfile which
were affected by the error you can add the verbose argument `-v`:

```
Mountpoint: system/tests/hosts
Configfile: /etc/hosts.13163:1575216150.11522.tmp
```

> Error messages from tools (`mount`, `set`, `get`, etc.) may yield different messages such as when providing false command line arguments

Reviewer: This does not really help, linking to doc/help/kdb.md might help.

or mounting without incorrect permissions.

## Error handling for developers

If you want to contribute to Elektra or write your own specific plugin you can use the integrated error macros which
eases the error handling. In general the [plugins README](plugins.md) is a good way to start you journey through writing your own plugin.
All macros can be used by including `kdberrors.h` into the source file.
For more information about the macros please read through [this](plugins.md#elektra_set_concrete_type_error) section.

> Internally when Elektra emits an error it sets a metadata to a Key which then is later on parsed into the error message.

Reviewer: This could be in more detail.

All associated metadata as well as a deeper introduction to error handling is given in our [error-handling tutorial](../dev/error-handling.md)

### Catching errors in language bindings

Elektra provides many useful language bindings which allows you to code for Elektra in your favorite programming language.
Since errors are built up hierarchically you can catch either general errors (e.g., all Permanent Errors) or a very specific one (e.g., Resource Error)
and react appropriate. For Java for example you can catch errors in the following form:

```java
		try
		{

> 			// your Elektra code

Reviewer: Which code could cause an exception?
